Be explicit about edge runtime in next.js docs (#13141)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: content/pages/framework-guides/nextjs/deploy-a-nextjs-site.md

[Next.js](https://nextjs.org) is an open-source React framework for creating websites and applications. In this guide, you will create a new Next.js application and deploy it using Cloudflare Pages.

> This guide will instruct you how to deploy a full-stack Next.js project which uses the [Edge Runtime](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/edge), via the [`next-on-pages`](https://github.com/cloudflare/next-on-pages/tree/main/packages/next-on-pages/docs) adapter.

Author: These docs are helpful but otherwise aren't easily discoverable, buried in a subdirectory of the `next-on-pages` project (which, if someone starts a project with C3, they don't really think about / know about)

filename: app/api/hello/route.js
highlight: [3]
---

> export const runtime = 'edge';

Author: This was removed in https://github.com/cloudflare/cloudflare-docs/pull/12506/files#diff-00c0cd43f8f2e5bb980df91ece416e5d96d844634f955370f9aa3bb32338bf39L66 — intentional?

Author: @admah - do you have context on why we changed this?

Reviewer: I'm guessing it was an oversight. If it needs to be there we should add it back 👍

After you have previewed your application locally, you can deploy it to Cloudflare Pages (both via [Direct Uploads](/pages/get-started/direct-upload/) or [Git integration](/pages/configuration/git-integration/)) and iterate over the process to make new changes.

{{<render file="/_framework-guides/_learn-more.md" withParameters="Next.js">}}

### Troubleshooting

> - All server-side routes in your Next.js project must be configured as "Edge" runtime routes, by adding `export const runtime = 'edge';` to each individual route. Refer to the [`next-on-pages` docs](https://github.com/cloudflare/next-on-pages/blob/main/packages/next-on-pages/docs/examples.md) for more examples.

Author: ```suggestion
- All server-side routes in your Next.js project must be configured as "Edge" runtime routes, by adding `export const runtime = 'edge';` to each individual route. Refer to the [`next-on-pages` docs](https://github.com/cloudflare/next-on-pages/blob/main/packages/next-on-pages/docs/examples.md) for more examples. If you see the error `failed to retrieve the Cloudflare request context` — try adding this to your route.
```

> - All server-side routes in your Next.js project must be configured as "Edge" runtime routes, by adding `export const runtime = 'edge';` to each individual route. Refer to the [`next-on-pages` docs](https://github.com/cloudflare/next-on-pages/blob/main/packages/next-on-pages/docs/examples.md) for more examples. If you see the error `failed to retrieve the Cloudflare request context` — try adding this to your route.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- All server-side routes in your Next.js project must be configured as "Edge" runtime routes, by adding `export const runtime = 'edge';` to each individual route. Refer to the [`next-on-pages` docs](https://github.com/cloudflare/next-on-pages/blob/main/packages/next-on-pages/docs/examples.md) for more examples.
```

I would really not put the `failed to retrieve the Cloudflare request context` here but improve the `getRequestContext` error message instead 🙂  https://github.com/cloudflare/next-on-pages/issues/674

(which is really trivial to do)

> - `next-on-pages` documents other common issues [here](https://github.com/cloudflare/next-on-pages/blob/main/packages/next-on-pages/docs/gotchas.md).

Author: @dario-piotrowicz @IgorMinar — these docs on gotchas are really good, but hard to discover. I think people expect to find them in the actual Cloudflare docs right here.

Reviewer 2: yeah I guess I agree 😓.... I've tried making them as discoverable as possible within the next-on-pages repo (by linking them whenever appropriate by other md files), but likely that's not too too helpful...

@irvinebroque do you think it could be if we removed the `gotchas.md` from the next-on-pages repo and include such a section here instead? (and in the next-on-pages readme [gotchas section](https://github.com/cloudflare/next-on-pages/tree/main/packages/next-on-pages#gotchas) link to this page)

Reviewer 2: Sure 🙂👍

After you have previewed your application locally, you can deploy it to Cloudflare Pages (both via [Direct Uploads](/pages/get-started/direct-upload/) or [Git integration](/pages/configuration/git-integration/)) and iterate over the process to make new changes.

> ## Gotchas

Reviewer 2: @deadlypants1973 Gotchas is not really a proper terminology is it? can you advise on something more appropriate? 😅

> ## Gotchas

Author: ```suggestion
## Debugging
```

> Let's explore some common pitfalls that you can encounter why developing a Next.js fullstack application for Cloudflare Pages.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> Let's explore some common pitfalls that you can encounter why developing a Next.js fullstack application for Cloudflare Pages.

Reviewer 3: "why developing" -> "when developing".

### Edge runtime

> All the server-side routes in your Next.js project must be configured as "Edge" runtime routes.

Author: ```suggestion
All server-side routes in your Next.js project must be configured as "Edge" runtime routes, when running on Cloudflare Pages.
```

> In order to do that remember to add `export const runtime = 'edge';` to each individual server-side route.

Author: ```suggestion
```

{{<Aside type="note">}}

If you're using the Pages router, for page routes you need to use `'experimental-edge'` instead of `'edge'`.

{{</Aside>}}

### App router

#### Not found

Next.js generates a not-found route for your application under the hood during the build process. In some circumstances Next.js can detect that the route requires server side logic (particularly if computation is being performed in the root layout component) and it might create a Node.js serverless function (which, as such, is incompatible with `@cloudflare/next-on-pages`).

To prevent such problem we recommend to always provide a custom not-found route which explicitly opts in the edge runtime:

```ts
---
filename: (src/)app/not-found.(jsx|tsx)
---

export const runtime = 'edge';

export default async function NotFound() {
    // ...
    return (
        // ...
    );
}
```

{{<Aside type="note">}}

Projects created with C3 have a default custom not-found page already created for them.

{{</Aside>}}

#### `generateStaticParams`

> When doing static site generation (SSG) in the app directory and using the [`generateStaticParams`](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/functions/generate-static-params) utility, Next.js by default tries to handle requests for non statically generated routes on-demand. It does so by creating a Node.js serverless function (which, as such, is incompatible with `@cloudflare/next-on-pages`).

Author: ```suggestion
When doing static site generation (SSG) in the [`/app` directory](https://nextjs.org/docs/getting-started/project-structure) and using the [`generateStaticParams`](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/functions/generate-static-params) function, Next.js by default tries to handle requests for non statically generated routes on-demand. It does so by creating a Node.js serverless function (which, as such, is incompatible with `@cloudflare/next-on-pages`).
```

In such cases you need to instruct Next.js not to do so by specifying a `false` [`dynamicParams`](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/route-segment-config#dynamicparams):

```diff
---
filename: app/my-example-page/[slug]/page.jsx
---
+ export const dynamicParams = false;

// ...
```

### Pages router

#### `getStaticPaths`

> When doing static site generation (SSG) in the pages directory and using the [`getStaticPaths`](https://nextjs.org/docs/pages/api-reference/functions/get-static-paths) utility, Next.js by default tries to handle requests for non statically generated routes on-demand. It does so by creating a Node.js serverless function (which, as such, is incompatible with `@cloudflare/next-on-pages`).

Author: ```suggestion
When doing static site generation (SSG) in the [`/pages`](https://nextjs.org/docs/getting-started/project-structure) directory and using the [`getStaticPaths`](https://nextjs.org/docs/pages/api-reference/functions/get-static-paths) function, Next.js by default tries to handle requests for non statically generated routes on-demand. It does so by creating a Node.js serverless function (which, as such, is incompatible with `@cloudflare/next-on-pages`).
```

> In such cases you need to instruct Next.js not to do so by specifying a [false `fallback`](https://nextjs.org/docs/pages/api-reference/functions/get-static-paths#fallback-false):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In such cases, you need to instruct Next.js not to do so by specifying a [false `fallback`](https://nextjs.org/docs/pages/api-reference/functions/get-static-paths#fallback-false):
```
can we change 'so' to its proper technical meaning? Such as:

 "...instruct Next.js not to create the Node.js serverless function by specifying...."

```diff
---
filename: pages/my-example-page/[slug].jsx
---
// ...

export async function getStaticPaths() {
    // ...

    return {
        paths,
+       fallback: false,
	};
}
```

{{<Aside type="warning">}}

> Note that the `paths` array cannot be empty as that causes Next.js to ignore the provided `fallback` value, so make sure that at build time at least one entry is present in the array

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `paths` array cannot be empty. An empty `paths` array causes Next.js to ignore the provided `fallback` value. At build time, make sure that at least one entry is present in the array.
```
